
NOTE: This page is out of date and will be removed after any relevant material is merged into the main developer's page.

If you're a user who just wants the latest features even if they have not been released yet, you can get the development "trunk" version. Beware that by its very nature that version can be unstable. Use it at your own risk.

=Precautions=

The trunk version supposedly offers certain features that you want. You probably want those features only on some particular existing projects. We recommend that you export those projects (as .tar.gz files) using your current released Open Refine version, and then re-import them when you run the trunk version. Then work on that new copy using the trunk version. You can always shutdown the trunk version and start up the released version and work with the old project. Or if things go really bad, you can scrap everything and re-import the saved .tar.gz files.

=What You Need=

To get the trunk version, you first need a [http://git-scm.com/downloads/guis git client]. 

You will also need [http://ant.apache.org/ Apache Ant] to build the source code. [http://ant.apache.org/bindownload.cgi Download], unzip, and point your path to it. Or you can try [http://wiki.apache.org/ant/AntOnWindows the Windows installer], too. Mac OSX ships with Apache Ant (you can check with

  *  ant -version

On Windows, after installing a git client and Ant, you may need to logoff, then logon for your user environment variables to take effect.

=Checking Out the Source=

Open a Terminal window. On Windows, this is done by

  * invoking the Start menu
  * picking "Run ..."
  * typing in: `command`
  * pressing Enter

On MacOSX, use Spotlight to find "Terminal".

In the Terminal window, change directory to wherever you want to put the Open Refine source code. If you don't know what that means, you don't have to do anything.

Then in the Terminal window, type

  * git clone git://github.com/OpenRefine/OpenRefine.git

You would see a lot of lines scroll past as the source is getting downloaded.

=Building the Source=

Change into the `grefine` directory by typing into the Terminal window

  * cd OpenRefine

Then build the source code:

  * on Windows, type: `refine build`
  * on MacOSX or `*`nix, type: `./refine build`

=Running=

To run, in the Terminal window

  * on Windows, type: `refine`
  * on MacOSX or `*`nix, type: `./refine`

You can then access Open Refine by pointing your browser to http://127.0.0.1:3333/

=Shutting Down=

To shut down OpenRefine, in the same Terminal window, press the key combination Ctrl-C.

You can shut down Open Refine at any time. You can even close the Terminal window altogether. To re-start Open Refine, open a new Terminal window if you already closed the old one, change to the directory where you put `Open Refine`, and just following the instruction to run in the previous section.

=Updating=

The trunk version will get updated as we work on it. To get the latest updates, shut down Open Refine if it's running. Then in a Terminal window, already changed to the `grefine` directory, type

 * git pull

Then follow the instructions to build and then to run.

Note: if you run into issues, the first thing to do is to clean your local copy with this command

 * ./refine clean

and then build again.